If I might have your attention please. I know you haven't finished with
breakfast, but we're going to need to expedite this. We're trying to pick up a
little time so that Victor Bourget can come in and do the second half of his
show.
I must confess that I feel a bit intimidated this morning, because as I looked
around this room, I was the only one I hadn't heard of.
If my name badge in your program is correct, I'm Vince Pisano, publisher of the
original Gannett Today, Florida Space Age newspaper, and that's a plug. And
despite what Ted Turner said, we still expect to be publishing in 10 years, even
if we have to deliver it by space shuttle. Now, this program, this convention,
really has been somewhat serious, quite serious. And I'd like to tell you a joke
that has no relationship to the morning program, but only because it's the best
one I've heard at this convention, and the only clean one. Or reasonably clean.
Seems that there was a man who attended a convention, and he decided to call
home. And he did, and the maid answered. And he said, may I speak to my wife,
please? And the maid hesitated and stammered a little bit. And he said, well,
where is she? And the maid said, well, she's indisposed. And he said, look,
never mind indisposed. He said, it's a long-distance call. I want to speak with
her. And the maid stammered a little bit more, and he said, look, now you want
to hold on to your job? I insist. Will you get my wife here? And the maid said,
if I must tell you, sir, she's upstairs having an affair with a gentleman. And
the man was incensed. And he said to her, he said, well, look, he said, I want
you to do exactly this. If you intend to hold this job, do exactly this. He
said, in the closet in the hall is a shotgun. I want you to go up and shoot her,
and I want you also to shoot her gentleman friend. And she said, must I? And he
said, if you want to continue working for me, you must. He said, now leave the
phone down. I want to hear all of this, and then come back and tell me about it.
So she set the phone down. A few seconds later, there was this blast. Boom. And
a few seconds more, boom, again. She came back to the phone, and she said, I did
it, sir. And he said, well, tell me about it. She said, well, I went up in the
room, and I shot the missus. And she said, her gentleman friend made it almost
to the window, but I got him there just as he was going out. She said, as a
matter of fact, he fell in the pool. He said, the pool, the swimming pool. He
said, by the way, is this 202-760?
John and Bob, you can see what kind of an audience this is. I told Al Newhart
that I was so honored at having the role of introducing America's newest space
heroes that I didn't know where to begin. And he suggested that I begin
somewhere near the end. Now, I'll do that, Al, but you just can't dump two guys
like John Young and Bob Crippen on an audience, particularly this audience,
without some comment. After all, they did take two years just getting ready for
a two-day flight. I need to say some nice things about them, but I guess I
won't. There isn't much of anything imperfect that you can say about either one
of these two very special men. And you know much about them and what they did,
and they will tell you more in just a few minutes. There are a few things you
might not know. So, in 1947, the speaker at John Young's graduation from Orlando
High School suggested that maybe one of this class will go up into space. And
little did he realize that John Young would do it five times, once pulling off
one of the greatest coups for junk food by smuggling a corned beef sandwich
aboard Gemini 3. So, it seems fitting that Bob Crippen would suggest that for
Columbia's first flight, instead of all of the special food aboard, that he'd
just go down to the hamburger place and pack a box lunch to take with him. John
Young and Bob Crippen are two cool and patient professionals in their business.
And we all felt sorry for them when they had to sit in their seats for hours
before the first launch attempt was postponed. But we must remember that John
waited eight years for the chance to fly Columbia, and that Bob is NASA's
official Enduro guinea pig, after having spent 56 days wired in a Skylab
simulator so crewmen could collect medical data. But the real marvel was not the
flawless launch, the flight, the landing, but the fact that Columbia was an
untested machine built by the lowest bidders, which had to convert from rocket
to spaceship to airplane, and then had to land out of gas, without power, and
with a malfunctioning commode in the laboratory. Not only that, but it was
handled by a pilot who required special eyeglasses to correct his
farsightedness, or Columbia would have overshot its California landing site and
touched down on the east-west runway at O'Hare Airport. Bob Crippen was
delighted at the April 14th landing, because he'd forgotten to mail his income
tax return. And John Young did what every driver does after a test drive. He got
out and kicked the tires. We're delighted to have with us two very human
superhumans, John Young and Bob Crippen. Thank you.
Vince, we want to thank you for that terrific introduction. He knows a lot more
about us than I thought it was possible to know. It's a great honor for both Bob
and I to be here to address this distinguished group. I think newspapers are
just about the greatest thing that this country has. The free press is a... You
know, I may not always agree with what's written in the newspaper, but by golly,
it's important for this country to keep a free press and to keep freedom of the
individual. And the free press is going to ensure that. So anytime you all are
looking for help in that regard, just come and see me.
We want to report to you on the events of this flight, and it was a fascinating
thing. The vehicle worked superbly from start to finish. I'm simply overjoyed
that some of the newspaper articles that I saw that said the tiles were going to
fall off and have a zipper effect, if they did fall off, didn't occur. And that
many of the other things that said it was a very difficult thing to do didn't
really work out. But, you know, there was an element in truth in all those
articles because we had a lot of engineering problems that were overcome by
NASA. The program slipped, the development program slipped about three years,
which I think, I believe I could have predicted that back in 1972 when I started
working on it and told everybody who'd listened, but nobody cared. They were
pressing on, which is the way they ought to be doing. So we're overjoyed to be
here today to report to you the results of this interesting and fascinating
flight. And we're greatly honored to be here. Let me put Bob on for a second.
Yes. With respect to what John was saying regarding the coverage, yes,
newspapers were a little bit critical of us. But I would also like to say that
after we got back and reading the coverage that was presented on numerous
newspapers that we've been presented with, we appreciate that. When we do what
we said we were set out to do, we got very positive coverage. I hope, and we
don't plan to, but if we stumble a little bit in the future, you will also
remember that we did super on the first flight. We hope that we have many more
to come. We've got the second flight right now is scheduled. They're targeting
for somewhere in October, I believe. That may be a little bit optimistic. And we
hope to get several more off next year. But rather than look at John and I up
here on the podium, why don't we go ahead and roll our film and tell you a
little bit about the flight. Can we go ahead and have the film, please?
Okay, this is a PR shot. It shows a liftoff the night before
launch, and this shows a suit-up that we're going through. That big flag on the
shoulder is my most distinguished achievement prior to launch. It used to just
match the space shuttle program, but I had to point out to them that the United
States is a lot bigger than the space shuttle program.
And this is a pretty tense moment when you're getting in there to go down to get
on the launch pad, because when you get there, you find out that everybody else
has left, and you're the only two people there. John said that was going to be a
little bit lonely out there. Actually, it was very pretty laying out and
watching the sunrise. We have nice big windows on board the Columbia, and you
can see them come up over the beach. You can see those masks they make the
closeout crew wear as we get in the spacecraft. We didn't make the—they make
them wear that for what they call health stabilization, and we did not make any
of the closeout crew sick.
This is a high-speed film of engine ignition. These engines are the high
-technology liquid hydrogen oxygen engines that are on the back end of the
vehicle. They have tremendous thrust and very lightweight, and they were a real
problem. And these babies just worked throughout the flight. Very exciting. This
is where the vehicle pitches forward. You can see the shadow moving forward and
back, and that's very exciting. Here's more high-speed film of the bolt blowing,
and the whole downarm is releasing, and the baby's getting up and ready to go.
And it was really moving on downrange a lot faster than this picture shows. This
next film shows the diamonds off the rockets, and those babies are really
putting out the thrust, over a million pounds. There was lots of banging right
here when it first lit off, but after that, it was a very smooth ride. This
shows how close it came to the inner tank access arm on the launch tower,
something I've been worried about for a long time. It really clears that tower
in a hurry. That's inside film.
We're coming up on the roll maneuver here, which is where we point our tail out
eastbound over the Atlantic Ocean. That was also a very nice, smooth turn, and
no problems whatsoever.
This vehicle is from inside the cockpit, the roll program, and it was just as
smooth as glass, and you can see a lot more than this film showed. You can see
the vertical assembly building and the whole Cape complex out there, including
the whole of Cocoa Beach. Right about now, the vehicle, after about 52 seconds,
is starting to go supersonic, and you can see it's going straight up, which is
absolutely phenomenal. Another thing you can see is there's a glow on the back
of that big external tank. There's a lot of heating going into that, and you'll
see later what that glow did to it. I'm actually glad we didn't have rear-view
mirrors. I didn't know all that fire was behind us at the time. That was about
600 or 700 feet long and 200 feet wide, and everybody's just amazed at how big
it is. You can see it better in this picture right here.
We got a little bit of shaking when we accelerated through going supersonic up
to max dynamic pressure, but other than that, this was a smooth ride, and
acceleration was very low at the 3G level we normally plan. Here's a separation
from an internal camera that's taken underneath the orbiter, and you can see
that's high-speed film printed in real time. And from inside the vehicle, you
can see the flame that shoots off with the solid rocket separation motors. And
here's an outside view of the same event. Those are 80-ton motor cases empty,
and they're parachuted back in the ocean. We're going to refill them and reuse
them. And I told them I'd just as soon not fly the first one they wanted to
refill. Actually, that staging event was very mild. There was no sensation in
the cockpit other than that flash we saw across the window. It was nice and
smooth. And right there, the vehicle is completely quiet inside. Even though
those thrusts are putting out over a million pounds of thrust, you don't hear
it. We were getting some debris coming off what appeared to be the external
tank, some white stuff flying by, and there's little bits you can see coming out
that window. That was umbilical separation in the external tank, and here you'll
see the external tank move away. This, again, was done from inside the vehicle,
inside the orbiter, on a couple of special engineering cameras. And we have it
done in high speed. The debris you see there is just frozen hydrogen. And
there's not anything flying off anywhere. I call your attention to the blackness
on the bottom of that tank, midway up it and up by the attach point, and then up
on the nose of the vehicle. That's due to aerodynamic heating and heating around
the fittings that go in there. And it never occurred to me that it would be
black. And, of course, the engineers, they said, Oh, yeah, we knew that. But I
was really surprised when I saw how that tank looked like it had been through a
small war. Actually, there was supposed to have been what we referred to as a
tumble valve, a fire off up in the nose of it that would cause the whole tank to
be set up in a tumble such that it would impact or blow up in a more precise
footprint. But that failed and actually gave us some much better pictures by not
doing so. This is internal film that shows Cripp. And actually, it's a donning
procedure. And we ran it backwards to show it looked like he was taking off his
equipment. We had so much trouble with that hat in 1G that it's interesting to
notice. When you have that hat freely floating in 0G, it doesn't bump anything
or lay on switches and throw switches inadvertently. And it is really delightful
to be up there in zero gravity. Yeah, those suits, which were very bulky to
work, we spent a considerable amount of time in simulations climbing around our
simulator in them. And we recommended for follow-on crews to not do that. It's
not worth the effort because in 0G it's like nothing.
We filmed this primarily for our follow-on crews to show them just how easy it
is to get out of the seat in zero gravity. There's about six or seven
connections you have to make, so it's not a rapid fire process. Right after we
got out of the seat, we opened up the payload bay doors, and that's two TV
cameras, both mucks together, that you're looking at right now. The one on the
left is a forward camera, and the one on the right is an aft camera. This shows
the door opening sequence. And I don't know if you can tell it from the film on
the left there, this is the first time we did see that we had a few tiles
missing off of our own spot. Yeah, as soon as you open the doors, you see the
tiles missing, and your confidence level does not pick up.
Actually, I think the ground was more excited about it than we were. Well, after
we found those were the only two tiles, yeah.
This fan shows us from the aft camera coming back, and you can see our radiator
deployed. The radiator's mounted on the inside of the payload bay doors, and
that's how we keep the spacecraft cool. This is a picture of me doing flight
control system checks to check the throw and frequency of the thing. You can see
I'm wearing spectacles there, and that's because I'm so ancient I have to use
them for reading glasses, and they work just fine in orbit just like they do on
the ground. So I think since about 40% of the astronaut office wears glasses,
they won't have any problems with that. It shows John climbing out of his seat
that we've got a camera up forward looking at. Actually, this is when we were
doing sort of a status press conference, and we used it to help demonstrate to
some of our managers some of the problems that we had with all the wires that we
had to use for comms. As you can see, there's a number of them floating through
there, and we had to be very careful about not getting them all tangled up. And
going to wireless mics, as a result of that display there, one picture being
worth 10,000 words, this thing was down on our mid-deck. You can see we've got a
considerable amount of room on board the Columbia to move around in. John
putting his best foot forward here or something. We just concluded the telephone
call with Vice President Bush, and we were playing around with the cameras a
little bit. This is not my best foot right here.
We found we didn't need restraints in the vehicle of any kind, even though
you're out there in the open. You just don't need them, and you can work just
like you do in 1G, which is delightful. Here I'm replacing some lithium
hydroxide canisters that we used to scrub out the carbon dioxide out of the air.
We had some compartments down below the deck. Actually, I just spitted my legs
down into the compartments and sort of squeezed them together to perform the
task, and we were just trying to demonstrate that you really did not need any
extra restraint. This part right here shows the mobility that Robert has in zero
gravity, and this next shot shows the easy access from downstairs to upstairs,
which is certainly a wonderful way to get from upstairs to downstairs and vice
versa. If you could do that in one gravity, it would be just terrific. Yeah, all
the times that we had to run up and downstairs in our simulator, this is a much
nicer way to do it. Here's a shot going out John's window of the earth below.
That shows how fast you're traveling, which is why you have to take photography
in a hurry or you miss things. Okay. Just another out-the-window scene. Shows
our radiator out there. We're going to fade here and just give you an idea of
some of the scenes that we did photograph on orbit. If we can hold the film and
have the first slide, please. You have to stop the film. There you go. That's
the middle of Algeria, that area out in there, and that shows some tremendous
problems they've been having with the way the deserts flow over and around
topography. The scientists are very interested in that because we're trying to
halt what they call desertification of the whole darn world out there so they
can get more of the land arable so people can eat better. Next slide.
This is a shot of an area that John and I spent a considerable amount of time
over in Italy. The area around Nice showing Pompeii is also very clear in that
particular photograph. Yes. The Sixth Fleet used to operate there for many
months at a time. They dock right down there where you see those docking things.
And a little further in, that picture is so clear that you can see the Blue
Grotto and El Sombrero, places where sailors of the Sixth Fleet have been known
to tangle with the shore patrol. Next slide.
This area here shows our landing site looking back on it actually. It's the
Mojave Desert out in California and it's Rogers Dry Lake Bend just about in the
center of the photograph. One of the nice things about flying here, you can do
your own weather checks prior to coming in because you pass over the area a
couple of times just prior to going ahead and de-orbiting for landing. That's a
real valuable lake bed complex and that shows it perfectly. I think between the
Air Force and the Navy, they probably saved the country a billion dollars worth
of airplanes by having that big dry lake surface to land on. Next slide, please.
One of your favorite places, John. The day before, this was all clear. This is
the big island of Hawaii which of course the volcanologists were very anxious to
have pictures of and there you see it. There's only the upper tip of it. It's
clear today. Next slide.
Actually, this is showing John. He had the left seat and he spent a considerable
amount of time up there going through one of the checklists and there's a little
optical sighting device that was right up forward that was used to take marks on
stars and we found out that it impeded getting in and out of the seats a little
bit and it shook a lot but it still was very repeatable. One of the nice things
about flying with a guy like John that knows all those stars I didn't have to
worry about it. Even though you hit that thing every time you got in and out of
the cockpit and it shook like a bowl full of jelly it would give us platform
alignments to five hundredths of a degree. Which is pretty accurate. Yeah,
that's good enough for government work. Next slide, please.
This actually just demonstrated up forward we could look back at and see the
radiators from either John's forward seat or my forward seat with the earth
below. Next slide.
These are a couple of big thunderstorms over the high Amazon basin and the
weather people are really anxious to have some of those and some of those babies
get up to 70,000 feet down by the equator. Thank goodness they don't do that
much in the United States or flyers would have a lot more trouble. And that's a
couple of them right there. The thing about the human eye is they can see those
things in three dimensions and they're absolutely spectacular and beautiful.
These pictures really don't do them justice. Don't do it justice. Next, lastly.
This is Eleuthera in the Bahamas. Another terrifically beautiful sight. Just
absolutely amazing. And the thing about the pictures is the emerald green in
those bays just doesn't show up the way it did. It sparked like an emerald. Just
incredible beauty. And there's so many places on the earth like that. I could
have stayed up there for six months taking pictures and each one would have
shown something that was just been spectacular. But they made us come down.
Yeah, they made us come down. Next slide, please. This is a picture John took of
me. Actually, I was having Chow back in the AF flight deck and we had the two
overhead windows that you can see there were a considerable amount of time. John
spent taking shots out there, but you can see the earth in the background. We
were flying around upside down and backwards at least with respect to the way
the spacecraft is oriented. Nice thing about zero-G, you can orient it any way
you want to. I think this illustrates one of the real uses of outer space. When
you can have a restaurant with a view like that, you're going to make a lot of
money. Next slide, please. Just a shot of what, of the Olmos pod again, taken
with the camera, mainly for documentation for our engineers back on the ground
as to what it looked like. Next slide.
This is Socotra off the Horn of Africa. And the reason we took this picture was
because of the cloud formations that are produced by, apparently, the
oceanographers and the weather people, the meteorologists, are really interested
in seeing why these cloud formations form this way. They indicate the presence
of strange things going on in water temperatures. And they have a lot of
interesting possibilities, even for the Department of Defense. Next slide. Just
a shot to show you what the Earth's limb and all of the sun glint, if you're
looking out over the ocean, it really didn't make things like the ship's wakes
very visible. And you can pick up ships from a very long distance by looking out
across the sun glint. Next slide. Maybe 300 miles you can see a ship. That's
good biz.
I think this is your hometown there, John. Yeah, I believe that's San Francisco.
It's very dim. San Francisco Bay area upside down. It's a beautiful clear day
out there. And if you get a little closer to that slide, you can see the Golden
Gate Bridge. And with the eye, you can see the Oakland Bay Bridge and all those
man-made features proving just about the only way you can prove that the Earth
is inhabited. So I'm up there. Next slide, please.
Oh, I give up. Beats me, I'm lost. Next slide.
Okay, that's this one we recognize. This is Mount Etna in Sicily, and it was, we
took two pictures of this. They'd come out in stereo, and this, this, the
volcanologists are really interested in seeing those things because the volcano
is still steaming from its most recent eruption. And from space, you can really
get a good view of the way that thing works, and also the meteorologists get a
good feel by studying these kind of photographs as to what kind of upper
atmosphere pollution you get from these volcanoes, which have kind of shown us
that they can sort of outdo to humanity when it comes to delivering the upper
atmosphere pollutants. Next slide.
This is a fantastic shot. On our last morning when we got up and I looked out
the window with John taking pictures, and we were coming over the Himalayas. We
were at an altitude of about 170 statute miles, and these big babies still
looked like they were awful close. Yeah, they looked like you could reach down
and touch them, and we shot stereo pairs in there. The geologists really like
this area from the standpoint of studying it in terms of glacial activity, in
terms of the upthrusting that the two plates coming together experienced that
have really caused that part of the world still to keep right on rising up at a
slow rate for us, but for the geologists it's rising tremendously. Next slide.
This is John trying to tuck away a bunch of books into a, took 60 some odd
pounds of books to put all the knowledge that we were supposed to have on board
the spacecraft in case we needed to find out about something and try to pack all
those things away in some of our canisters that got a little bit tight at the
end. Well, I brought this picture back so I could illustrate to our flight data
file people that when the book is bigger than the box it goes in and you can't
put it in there. Next slide, please.
This is the empty quarter in Arabia. Those big parallel dunes, and I don't know
if you can see them or not, are hundreds of miles long. The reason it's called
the empty quarter is when you try to walk up one of those dunes it rolls over on
you and suffocates you so nobody messes around out there unless they're
helicoptered in. Oil well crews that won't work out there. They're hundreds of
miles long and maybe many miles in between the dunes. But empty quarter is well
named. Next slide, please. This is a very familiar area of Cape Cod out in
Boston that's a beautiful sight from any place and we've managed to get the
shots of it on quite a few big flights. We just couldn't resist. It was so clear
up there that day. Just had to take a picture of that beautiful world and we got
the whole area. Wouldn't have missed it. Next slide.
[No audio.]